---
layout: post
title:  "What Sensitive Means"
date:   2015-01-12 10:30:30
---

January is often a time for self reflection, and I am happy to look back on where I have come not only in the past year but in my time in my career in tech. I have emotionally felt the full cycle of social issues, from being blissfully ignorant to any problems; to thinking tech is “not that bad”; to gleefully being accepted as “one of the boys”; and then to pure feminist rage at the inequalities around me. Through this rage I found comfort, community, and my voice.

However, at one point while discussing a side-comment, I vividly remember saying “I never wanted to become this overly sensitive person.” I could always take a joke, I always had a sense of humor, I used to laugh at the “funny” women-in-the-kitchen jokes made on Family Guy. So, to suddenly look in the mirror and see someone who called out strangers for expressing problematic jokes was someone I never expected (or frankly, wanted) to see. I never wanted to be the person who was seen as not being able to take a joke.

<!--more-->

And it’s something I still struggle with. “Am I just being too sensitive? They didn’t really mean it like _that_, though.” Because being a “sensitive woman” who calls out systemic problems in our industry inherently makes you not fit into the beer, meat, and joke-driven culture that so many tech companies hold themselves to. Even worse, being “sensitive” is often seen as an attack to the other person.

But being “sensitive” does not have to have a negative connotation. Pointing out problematic language does not necessarily mean that *I* am always personally offended. I’m not just being sensitive to my own feelings, I’m being sensitive to other humans you will have future interactions with. It’s part of being an ally to marginalized groups, to use my voice when others can’t. And I am also being sensitive to you, the person who may not be aware of the implications and how that affects your self image. Just like the #YesAllWomen and #NotAllMen hashtags, there are many instances where different groups do not realize the injustices that the other faces—there were many things that men “didn’t even think about” that women face every day. Through the Ferguson events and social media, I learned a lot about Black culture that I, as a white woman, never faced. It’s heartbreaking to learn your privilege, but it’s imperative to our culture to become exposed to other groups’ experiences. By surrounding yourself with “sensitive” people, the “sensitivity” will become the norm—because why are you fighting to continue to (albeit ignorantly) say and act in ways that are offensive to others, even if you don’t mean to?

A good example of this sort of behavior successfully becoming eradicated is the outdated use of offensive slang for developmentally disabled and homosexual people as synonyms for “stupid.” These words were everywhere in the 90s and early 00s, watch any sitcom and be horrified. But luckily, we rarely hear them casually used anymore. There was a turning point where if someone used these words, someone commented “hey, that’s not cool.” Taken aback, it was commonly retorted “pff, you’re just being super PC” but hopefully, they thought twice next time they wanted to say it. With enough people commenting on this uncool language, it eventually fizzled out. And now, I can’t even fathom being in a conversation with an adult and hearing them use such words without thinking they must have been raised in a barn. Wouldn’t you be horrified if that was never pointed out to you and you were that uneducated person saying these things?

Fighting for the right to say offensive jokes is not a good look on anyone. Being overly sensitive—the dictionary definition of sensitive being: “(of a person or a person's behavior) having or displaying a quick and delicate appreciation of others' feelings”—is a good look on everyone. Let’s not be afraid of giving or receiving constructive feedback on our interactions, it’s imperative to fostering a welcoming, diverse community. 

